my concern is that in the 21st century
science to a much greater extent than
religion
becomes a mask for self-righteous
stupidity today i want to talk about an
issue that must have occurred to
everyone who spent some time thinking
about
physics which is that the idea of free
will
is both incompatible with the laws of
nature
and entirely meaningless
this means in a nutshell that the whole
story of the universe in every single
detail was determined already at the big
bang
we're just watching it play out these
deterministic laws of nature
apply to you and your brain because you
are made of particles
and what happens with you is a
consequence of what happens with those
particles
i feel like i must add here a word about
the claim
that human behavior is unpredictable
because if someone told you that they
predicted you do one thing
you could decide to do something else
this is the rubbish argument because it
has nothing to do with human behavior
it comes from interfering with the
system you are making predictions for
it is easy to see that this argument is
nonsense because you can make the same
claim
about very simple computer codes
there is neither good nor evil but
thinking makes it so
there is neither science nor
pseudoscience
in this world but thinking makes it so
in examining science we are
largely examining our own
conceptions misconceptions and desires
the various agendas we have that we
seek to legitimate through this notion
of science and what science
means to you if you stop and reflect on
it for a moment
you've probably engaged in a kind of
cherry picking
a kind of selective
narrowing of the notion of science to
suit your agenda
some people in this audience right now
may think of science
primarily in terms of physics some
primarily in terms of chemistry you know
the behavioral sciences are also
scientists
computer programming counts as a science
these days economics
anthropology if you think of science
first and foremost in terms of the study
of the behavior of animals
and then you apply that paradigm to the
behavior of
humans you come to very different
philosophical conclusions about some of
these same questions
like the nature of free will and
determinism then someone's notion of
science comes out of
theoretical physics chemistry or someone
who sees the whole world
in terms of a protracted allegory
of explaining the human mind in terms of
its supposed resemblance
to how a computer system reads a hard
drive
and as i've said in earlier videos
actually the resemblance to how your
mind works and how a needle reads data
off a hard drive
it's just not that convincing an
allegory it doesn't have that much
explanatory power scientists have to
make really
difficult decisions in the
interpretation of animal behavior
you may or may not have seen videos here
on the internet
of ravens engaged in play
one of the most common misconceptions
about animals is that only
animals with the most advanced
intelligence engage in play no that's
that's a crass superstition i must say
no i've seen
videotape evidence of ants
apparently engaged in play now
what is play and how can a human
observer determine
whether an ant is playing whether it is
doing something for fun
doing something imaginative to cope with
boredom doing something inventive and
silly
or if that ant is trying to get rid of
parasites
that may be invisible to the human eye
but not to the ant's eye or something
what if the ant has some very specific
instinctual
behavior that we're observing and
misinterpreting as play
well even in looking at a videotape of a
raven
or group of ravens doing something that
you and i now may just casually evaluate
being just for fun
being silly being invented being played
as such
take a look into it and this is a very
difficult area of the sciences
what is the checklist we go through how
can we determine
whether or not an animal is doing
something as play
or and of course this is the other thing
what's the opposite of playing
[Music]
do
ravens seemingly mocking one another as
they roll over in the snow
to see which one of them can roll down a
hill further apparently in terms of what
we see with the naked eye
to sit there and challenge yourself as
an observer
and say okay to what extent am i as a
human just
ignorant of what these birds instincts
are or what their objectives are what
the purpose
of this activity is and to what extent
am i comfortable making the decision
yes right now this raven is just playing
this is just silly this is just fun
going back to the most ancient of
ancient greek
sources we have human beings observing
dogs primarily dogs engaged in hunting
cooperatively with humans dogs that have
been trained to
hunt prey hunt other animals but also
sometimes they're dogs being used to
track down
humans by their scent you know
you have these dogs working closely with
people and people can observe
the dog being engaged in a rational
decision-making
process in ancient greek do dogs have
dialectic
it's actually a common staple for debate
they watch what the dogs are doing they
can see for example
that the dog has two different paths
that based on the scent
the dog is not sure which way let's say
the person has gone the prey that the
dog is pursuing is gone
and so it goes down a certain path a
certain distance it goes a little ways
sniffing carefully
and then decides no this isn't the path
it runs back to the
the fork and the road so to speak and
then heads off down the other path
human beings had not just years but
centuries of working closely with
animals
and observing the ways in which they
make decisions
and discussing and philosophizing with
the role of
reason and intelligence in
animal behavior such as we could see it
now
the question we're asking compared to
the complexity of determining whether or
not an animal is engaged in play
is mind-blowingly simple when you're
looking at that dog
or you're looking at that raven or
you're looking at that ant the question
of so-called free will versus
determinism
is really just of whether or not that
dog
is making a decision at all
if the dog is deciding
for itself then that dog is determining
its own course of action and there is
nothing further to be debated in this
pseudo-scientific pseudo-philosophical
debate now if the dog
is not making its own decision
that gets into quite a philosophically
interesting area of discussion
parallel to what i alluded to before
what is not play what are our
assumptions if we're saying that no i'm
certain that animal is not playing i'm
certain that animals not having fun
that it's acting you know uh in the
interests of its own survival
most scientists are willing to accept
that hypnosis is a real phenomenon for
human beings
right and actually for some animals
animal hypnosis
uh people are aware of the phenomena of
a deer are trapped in the headlights
so-called mesmerism in the animal
kingdom
rarely talked about but sure sometimes
they seem to be in a hypnotic trance
all right most people
not all would accept that hypnosis is
something other
than making decisions for yourself that
if someone has hypnotized you
to commit murder and we again you can
see this
on camera in tv studios this is fairly
common
i myself have seen videotape of someone
who there wasn't a real
it was a the gun wasn't really loaded
but a hypnotist brought them through
step by step committing an assassination
so this can be demonstrated on camera or
in laboratory conditions
most people would accept that if someone
is in a state of hypnosis they're not
responsible for their own actions so
here we have a clear
dichotomy between what what you decide
for yourself
what you can call free will and what you
do not decide for yourself
some people not all except that if
you're sleepwalking
you don't make decisions for yourself
right some people accept that if you're
in a disassociative state
you do not make these decisions yourself
and point out
i keep saying some people believe this
for the convenience of the courts
for the convenience of the ethical and
legal system that rules our society as a
whole
uh very often we choose not to accept
these excuses
many societies around the world will
just say look oh we don't care
if you were in a disassociative state we
don't care if you were drunk
we don't care if you say you were
sleepwalking we don't care if you say
that you visited a hypnotist earlier
that day and you
lapsed back into a hypnotic state when
you committed this murder if there
wasn't somebody else in the room who
pulled the trigger instead of you if you
were the one holding the gun
you're legally responsible and that is a
legal fiction
we're going to live with because we
don't want to have a jury having
having to determine to what extent you
were not
in control of your actions so even if
that's completely insincere
this is the kind of legal fiction we may
deal with to have our systems of
morality make sense in the society and i
do think there would be a few people
here and there amongst
scientists to give you an example i
remember reading
a genuinely skeptical article from a
a scientist questioning whether or not
amnesia exists and he was pointing out
movies and soap operas tv shows they
very often feature characters who have
an emotional experience
and then forget parts of the plot
and um he was really arguing that in
terms of empirical evidence
although a lot of people engage in
wishful thinking a lot of people have a
fantasy that they want to start a new
life and pretend
that they forget that really forgetting
in this sense
amnesia as depicted in movies that this
doesn't exist in the absence of a
massively traumatic brain injury and
other interruptions of the function
that actually no people don't just lapse
into amnesia this way so
now i think many scientists would
disagree with him also i mean
there's more than one perspective in
this debate all right
if we were to approach this question of
free will or determinism from the
perspective
of the sciences but which sciences
you see from the perspective of the
behavioral sciences
applied to animals right doesn't this
all seem ridiculous
to be insisting that the posing of the
question and the answer to the question
is going to be determined through the
laws of physics
and the incredibly abstract claim that
cause and effect as such the
relationship between
molecules as such renders the research
question invalid
renders both hypotheses impossible to
pursue or prove
oh oh okay so um
the laws of physics you're talking about
here the laws of cause and effect does
that mean it is impossible to determine
whether a raven is at play
or is not at play is pursuing a
particular objective an instinct
when it's rolling around the snow does
that mean we're incapable
of examining the behavior of a raven a
dog
an ant and evaluating and determining
whether or not that animal
is making its own decision oh does that
mean
that there's just no point ever having a
debate
in a court of law about whether somebody
was in a state of hypnosis or not in a
state of hypnosis
whether someone made a decision for
themselves or if there really was some
circumstance
some kind of uh impulsion shall we say
some kind of relationship of cause and
effect like billiard balls
on a table that forced them to do the
thing that they did
i use the example before of actually
being electrocuted and your
your nerve ending seizing up in your
hands where you say no i didn't decide
to clench my fist
and maybe you were holding a gun and you
clenched your fist inside of the gun
you stepped on an electric wire the
electricity went through your body
so your muscles contracted and that
wasn't a decision you made
that wasn't something voluntary that was
something involuntary
that was something you didn't decide
that was something
determined by cause and effect in this
sense
in summary the idea that we have a free
will which gives us
the possibility to select among
different futures
is both incompatible with the laws of
nature and logically incoherent if you
want to
define free will in such a way that it
is still
consistent with the laws of nature that
is fine by me
though i will continue to complain
that's just verbal acrobatics
in any case regardless of how you want
to define the word
we still cannot select among several
possible futures
this idea makes absolutely no sense if
you know anything about physics
what is really going on if you are
making a decision is that your brain is
running a calculation
and while it is doing that you do not
know what the outcome of the calculation
will be
because if you did you wouldn't have to
do the calculation why am i telling you
this
because i think that people who do not
understand
that free will is an illusion
underestimate how much
their decisions are influenced by the
information
they are exposed to looking at the
intellectual contribution
of people like sabina
hassenfelder looking at the intellectual
contribution of somebody like
cosmic skeptic you know i am inclined to
just
point the finger and laugh you know and
maybe something would be accomplished by
doing that too
maybe there would be something
accomplished by pointing the finger
and drawing attention to the extent to
which these people rely on
circular reasoning outright fallacious
reasoning what's called patitio
principii the begging of the question as
a formal logical fallacy
the extent to which they rely even on
the
outrageously misleading definition of
terms
and sometimes the inconsistent
definition of well in one context this
is what they meant
by determinism or determined and then
they're using a different definition
just a few minutes later in the same
video there's a lot of stupidity there's
a lot of dishonesty there's a lot of
self-deception going on there but what
comes across
to me most of all in those videos is
their
almost messianic ego trip
both cosmic skeptic and sabina
um they really think of themselves as
extraordinarily intelligent people
people who even have some sort of
mission or purpose
in enlightening the mure fuels
the mirror fools such as you and i uh
in the audience guiding us to the light
of their
supposedly uh scientific discoveries
and what's being covered over there is
the extent to which science
doesn't represent something
diametrically opposite to
and incompatible with people pursuing
an agenda all right not at all
in large part the development of the
sciences comes from people
in a totally biased one-sided passionate
way
pursuing an agenda and they slant and
misrepresent all the facts
and support that agenda for as long as
they possibly can until
something cracks something breaks and
somebody's willing to admit
that this whole paradigm of accumulated
highly systematic self-referential and
consistent information um in fact is
is terribly wrong uh in the admission
that we've made mistakes
and then in shifting to a new paradigm
we start to have something
you know resembling science whether
you're looking at
the history of development of the
medical sciences
physics or any other field you will see
this pattern again and again
it was very hard for me to accept you
know
um when i was working in the social
sciences
that christians
would come to cambodia with an agenda
they would pay money to do scientific
research
proving that
the relaxed buddhist attitudes that
cambodians have towards
prostitution homosexuality
are terrible things that instead
cambodia ought to resemble much more
a western christian society that
represses and
forbids prostitution and homosexuality
this was science this is
this is science this is people paying
for research
in pursuit of an agenda right and of
course
i saw other foundations in cambodia run
by
left-wing feminists who were paying for
scientific research to prove that the
best possible thing for cambodia
would be to completely legalize and
encourage
prostitution that this is part of the
upliftment deliberation of
of women that you know to have as many
prostitutes as possible with as few
restrictions as possible and as much
female empowerment through prostitution
as possible very ham-fisted attempts to
take what are
clearly political and even religious
value statements
and make them seem like some kind of
objective
fact now
cambodia might seem a long way away
do you think this is healthy
[Laughter]
do you think a vegan diet is healthy
do you think eggs are healthy
do you think cheese is healthy
what we call science uh is not the
opposite
of the sphere of human emotions
human passions human beings in a
completely biased one-sided way
pursuing an agenda all right science
consists of people
paying money to present completely
one-sided bias research
precisely in pursuit of an agenda people
prove
that the eggs in cholesterol does you no
harm at all
they publish new studies and new
magazine articles claiming that again
and again and again the behest of the
egg industry and i have indeed seen
horrendously biased in one-sided
research from proponents of veganism
supporting a vegan diet and even though
i'm vegan myself
i have to laugh because i'm i'm not
willing to live a lie
not even if it's convenient for my own
diet or my own
political ideology what i see people
doing is
pointing to the word science and then
not taking responsibility for their own
agenda
for why it is they feel the way they do
for why it is they're arguing
what it is they're arguing my concern is
that in the 21st century
science to a much greater extent than
religion
becomes a mask for self-righteous
stupidity it becomes a way of presenting
your own
ignorant biases as if
they're objective fact i mean really
people like to disrespect my crew but
the fact is that you know my name and i
don't know you